## Job market analysis with Excel
### Purpose:
This project is meant for demonstrating data analysis and visualization skills with Excel, as a combination of a one-time analysis and a dashboard showing the results. The topic is the current job market situation in Finland – it was chosen because it was personally important and interesting due to moving back to Finland and looking for new kinds of jobs after graduation.

Two target industry groups were selected as a focus point: 1) Professional, scientific, and technical activities (although sometimes data was only available as combination with other service industries), and 2) Construction.

The goal was also to learn to apply the skills and knowledge gathered from degree studies into a project starting from scratch: e.g. different aspects of analysis with Excel, seeing the big picture and causalities, time series analysis in general, data visualization principles, storytelling, as well as utilizing approaches from stock market analyses when appropriate. Along the process, it was also important to search for new information (e.g. economics, statistics).
### Preparations regarding scope, relevance, clarity:
Deciding on the scope went through a couple iterations. It was certain at least to analyze the unemployment rate in Finland compared to EU, and also to analyze the job vacancies of the target industries in Finland. Other possible more specifying aspects in consideration were region in Finland, age groups, education level, other adjacent industries. However, after investigating the data sources available, they would have made the visualizations too complicated and confusing. Too long a time range also contributed against a simple end result, so it was limited to 2019-2024. The other specifying aspects would have also made the analysis less current and relevant, because at certain sources there was not yet current enough data available with them. Therefore, it was better for the analysis impact to not have too many aspects at the same time.
### Main questions for the analysis:
Starting point: Why is unemployment high right now? Why is it more difficult to find jobs?

- What is the current situation with unemployment rate and job vacancies? Are there any signs of improving yet?
-  What are the causes? Why do companies and the economy struggle? Why is Finland’s unemployment rate much higher than the EU average?
### Choosing the metrics and presentation:
Since all sources to be used were time series datasets, and the whole purpose was to investigate the situation over time, this set a few limitations or directions for the metrics and technical approach. To be able to clearly visualize data from 6 years, with monthly, quarterly, or annual values, majority of the visualizations was created with line charts, with a few KPI cards and a column chart when suitable. Many of the data sources were already available with change percentages, which is why less calculations and formatting was required in the analysis than originally planned.

Originally, one of the technical goals was to bring the separate datasets together using Excel’s Power Query and Power Pivot to create a data model. However, it became evident that there was no need for a data model in this analysis - it was easier to simply prepare each dataset in Power Query Editor and to establish connections to the analysis workbook, and continue exploring from there.
### Technical implementation and analysis activities:
The analysis was a learning process in terms of adapting to technical outputs and solving problems regarding the efficiency and clarity of the implementation.

The first challenge was to choose and prepare the best datasets from most suitable and reliable sources. A few iterations were done on downloading the most relevant values from the sources, e.g. regarding the filters and types of data they provided. Some data topics were available e.g. in numbers and in percentages, with different frequencies, seasonally adjusted or not adjusted etc.

All datasets were cleaned up in Power Query Editor, e.g. to remove redundancies and to consolidate them into the most practical forms. One challenge within this was that some data sources formatted the dates as e.g. 01-01-2019 although the frequency was by month, while others used 2019M01 formatting, which Excel did not recognize as a time format. At this point the author knew that it was probably possible to format them in the Power Query Editor using DAX, but did not yet have deeper skills in DAX. Those occasions were resolved by first loading some data as a table into the workbook and editing the date formatting there as it was familiar, before creating a PivotTable and PivotChart as was originally planned. This is also because there were certain deadlines or goals set for finishing the project, and stopping to learn more DAX then would have delayed the output. The data was formatted into PivotTables and PivotCharts because that way it was easier to test different formats and combinations while creating the visualizations.

The next challenge was that after creating the visualizations for the unemployment rate and the job vacancies, there were several options on what more to analyze, because so many topics contribute to the forementioned ones. At this point the author did not have deeper knowledge in economics terms, e.g. the connections to GDP, national banks, or the EU financial regulatory bodies, so it was decided due to efficiency of the project to focus more in the analysis in the causalities with the consumer price index, the impact of COVID-19 and the sanctions against Russia, as well as the labor costs. For these topics, it was fairly straightforward to begin to see the connections to the issues central to the job market analysis.

Originally, it had been planned that the dashboard would be slightly more dynamic and e.g. more switching along the timeline would have been easy, but due to deadlines and the fact that the nature of the analysis was only one-time use (also because no newer data was planned to be added afterwards), the dashboard was finalized as a less dynamic and more analysis-presenting solution.
### Conclusion:
To sum up insights found from the data, the conclusion was written to show the causality of symptoms of disruption in Finland’s economy, and therefore summing up also the answers to the starting point questions. Additionally, a scenario of how the situation could get resolved was presented, included with variables that influence the likelihood and outcomes in the future. These were also visualized into figures with PowerPoint at the end of the analysis.
